In the previous lecture,
I discussed Proof-of-Work and
how it enabled randomness
in a decentralized way.
But critical to Proof-of-Work
is the solving of a hash puzzle.
This process enables randomness
only if no one node can accrue
enough power to monopolize the network.
And it also means that Bitcoin
trading in its current implementation
is potentially slow and limited.
So I'm going to discuss these issues and
at the end,
I would discuss some broader
challenges and summarize the module.
So here's the first challenge to
Proof-of-Work called the 51% Attack.
What if a node succeeds in gaining
a majority of the CPU power across all
nodes?
This node would then be the first
to solve all the hash puzzles.
And then this node could build
the longest chain in the blockchain.
So this system would then revert
to being partially centralized.
You could think about it a little bit like
James coin from the few lectures ago.
So let's discuss the situation.
First note that if a node were to
obtain a majority of CPU power it
would have to act as
a benevolent dictator.
Now, this may not be much comfort
to have a benevolent dictator, but
let's foresee why it would have
to act as a benevolent dictator.
The only possible reward to gaining CPU
power and to proposing blocks is bitcoins.
Now, a malicious 51% attacker could
include lots of bitcoin payments to him or
herself through their address.
But actually, no other nodes would
let this attacker spend the coins, so
it'd be a little bit pointless.
So any 51% attack is limited
in its profitability,
and this will already reduce
the incentives for such an attack.
And key is the fact that any attacker
is going to have a very large incentive
to maintain trading in bitcoins
because probably, this attacker
has a lot of bitcoins through all
the block rewards received over time.
And that also disincentivizes this 51
is present attack in a broader sense.
So we've already seen this in operation.
In 2014, a mining pool came
close to the 51% mark and
voluntarily kept their control at 39.9%
calling on others to do the same.
So because the potential attackers
already have a stake in the system,
if they are behaving in a self
interested way, they have the reasons to
not only avoid the attack but avoid
the circumstances that lead to the attack.
Thus, this is unlikely to occur.
Now, a weaker version of
the 51% attack is what
would happen if a small number of nodes
were to control all the mining power.
As bitcoin mining has become
industrialized, this has been occurring.
So it appears that mining
power is concentrated in
perhaps a small number of nodes,
it's hard to say for sure.
So here's a worry,
these miners could form a cartel.
Now I'm not saying that the credit
card companies are like a cartel but
if they were, maybe the same thing could
happen to the small number of nodes.
They could then charge high transaction
fees because transaction fees
are as we discussed,
part of the reward for creating blocks.
This is also like seigniorage,
which is essentially the tax
from the sovereign to inflation
seigniorage, under another name.
Could this occur?
Yeah, it could occur.
It hasn't yet occurred though,
and perhaps one reason for
that is that,
all involved have a stake, a very
large stake perhaps in the continued
success of bitcoin as a currency.
Okay, so, that's challenge one, the 51%
attack and related oligopoly power.
It hasn't proven to be a big challenge
yet, we don't know for sure if it could
become a big challenge but there
are reasons to suspect that it won't.
So Proof-of-Work Challenge 2,
Resource Intensity.
So bitcoin mining uses
lots of electricity.
Maybe uses too much electricity.
Well actually, it doesn't use that much.
At most at the moment,
it uses only 6% of the energy used
in the global banking sector.
And it's way, way, way tiny compared
to the energy use of total consumption.
Now, why is this?
Mining takes place where energy
is not a scarce resource, and
it can continue to do so.
So, this is apparently a concern,
but it turns out not really.
Now perhaps, one has a philosophical
concern regarding the energy use.
Here's a green and
environmental critique of Bitcoin.
It appears that miners are using
energy to basically solve a puzzle.
Now that seems a little silly, right?
I mean usually, if we're using energy,
we are hoping to create
something that people can use.
But here,
all of this energy is going to waste,
would go this critique because
it's all used for puzzle solving.
So what's the point of that?
It seems wasteful.
Well, I think it depends
how you look at it.
I don't agree with this critique.
In fact,
Proof-of-Work does something useful.
It's a technology that
enables trading in Bitcoin.
Now, trading in Bitcoin through
Proof-of-Work is implemented as
a zero-sum game.
But as long as one believes Bitcoin
is a net benefit to society,
there is a net benefit
to society in mining.
It really is producing something.
What is it producing?
Well, it's producing the working
of Bitcoin the system.
So I don't think this concern is valid.
Okay, so here's a third challenge.
Can the network scale?
So blocks are limited in size.
Blocks are limited in how
quickly they can be created.
And this puts pretty much a hard
upper limit on the number of transactions
per second, and there are not very many.
This is not seem sufficient to be
a large scale medium of exchange and
this would really cap bitcoins usefulness.
This is really, I think the part
of Nouriel Roubini's critique
in his congressional testimony
that carries the most weight.
And it's safe to say that given
this problem achieving scale
is the most discussed
issue in cryptocurrency.
Blogs on cryptocurrency point
out the following trilemma,
that blockchain systems can have at most
of the three, being decentralization,
scalability, and security.
But just by saying this trilemma,
this trilemma doesn't mean that
it's an impossibility result.
So just because within bitcoin,
there's no good answer to whether
the network can scale, doesn't mean
that there won't be an answer.
Ethereum, for example,
has a different version of Proof-of-Work.
It uses many of the same underlying
principles that I just described, but
it seems perhaps to scale better.
I will now summarize the module and
then give some further thoughts.
So Bitcoin, and perhaps other established
cryptocurrencies, create a system of
property rights that does not depend on
enforcement by centralized authorities.
These property rights can span
jurisdictions, thus allowing for
trades in ways that was previously
expensive or difficult, or illegal.
Cryptocurrencies enable this feat
through technology, mathematics, and
what I would call
philosophical innovation.
Property rights need not
hold with certainty,
it is sufficient that they
hold probabilistically.
In this module, I discussed how
the digital signature, blockchain and
Proof-of-Work enable these property
rights and hence, Bitcoin to operate.
Now, some closing thoughts.
In one of the previous lectures,
I pointed out that a money system
is really a memory system.
The Bitcoin system is a problem
of collective memory.
So like any society, the Bitcoin society
relies on the truthfulness of this
collective memory to function well.
Is it possible to tamper
with collective memory?
Yes, it can be given enough power and
a willingness of people to behave
maliciously, collective
memory can be tampered with.
And in the 20th century,
actual collective memory has been
tampered with two disastrous effects.
Think Stalin, or Hitler, or Mao.
So Bitcoin like society
relies on this not happening.
Now interestingly, Bitcoin is not
actually completely decentralized.
It requires that nodes agree on
what's called the reference software.
Now, when there is agreement about
what should be the reference software,
something called a hard fork is created.
So that's Bitcoin can flexibly
accommodate descent without a solution.
But there does need to be widespread
agreement about what Bitcoin means.
And there also must be some level
of commitment to
the continuation of the network.
In other words, malicious behavior for
its own sake could destroy Bitcoin.
Thus, Bitcoin and cryptocurrency
is in general a vast experiment.
We don't know exactly why Bitcoin works,
we only know that it does.